Proposed Charter Amendment: Question 1 Section 1. Section 364 of the New York city charter, as added by a vote of the electors on November 7, 1989, subdivision e as amended by local law number 121 for the year 2023, is amended to read as follows: § 364. Revocable consents. a. A revocable consent shall not be granted for a use that would interfere with the use of inalienable property of the city for public purposes, nor shall a revocable consent be granted for a purpose for which a franchise may be granted. b. All revocable consents shall be revocable at any time by the responsible agency, shall be granted for a fixed term, and shall provide for adequate compensation to be annually provided to the city during the continuance of the consent. c. Revocable consents, other than for telecommunications purposes, may be granted by the department of transportation with respect to property under its jurisdiction or by such other agency as may be authorized by law to grant revocable consents. Revocable consents for telecommunications purposes may be granted by the department of information technology and telecommunications. All revocable consents shall require the approval of the department of transportation. d. Every petition for the grant of a revocable consent shall be filed with the department of transportation. Each petition shall state the location of the proposed revocable consent and shall be in such form and contain such other information as the department of transportation and other responsible agencies, if any, shall require by rule. Petitions for each type of revocable consent shall 
 be distributed to and reviewed by the agencies required to do so by local law or executive order of the mayor. If, in the judgment of the department of city planning, a proposed revocable consent has land use impacts or implications, the petition for the proposed revocable consent shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d. e. Notwithstanding any provision of this charter or the administrative code, revocable consents to construct and operate sidewalk cafes shall be reviewed pursuant to [sections 19-160 through 19-160.6 of the administrative code] this chapter. § 2. Section 371 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 121 for the year 2023, is amended to read as follows: § 371. Public hearing on proposed agreement; publication of notice. a. The franchise and concession review committee [in the case of a franchise, or the responsible agency in the case of a revocable consent,] shall hold a public hearing on the proposed agreement memorializing the terms and conditions of each proposed franchise [or revocable consent] before final approval of the proposed franchise [or consent]. Any such public hearing conducted by the franchise and concession review committee shall be held within thirty days of the filing with the committee by the responsible agency of a proposed agreement containing the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise. b. A responsible agency may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing on a proposed agreement memorializing the terms and conditions of a proposed revocable consent before final approval of such proposed consent. In determining whether to hold such hearing, a responsible agency may consider factors including, but not limited to, the location and size of the inalienable property that would be subject to such proposed consent, the length of such proposed consent, the 
 proposed use of such property, and whether a hearing would be beneficial to address concerns about the effect of such proposed revocable consent at the proposed location. c. The responsible agency shall provide notice of a petition for a revocable consent to the community board and the council member in whose district, and the borough president in whose borough, the property subject to such revocable consent is proposed to be located. 1. Such agency shall provide an opportunity for such community board, borough president and council member to submit comments related to such petition and shall make best efforts to facilitate additional community input through various methods, including, but not limited to, posting information relating to such petition for a revocable consent on such agency’s website and social media accounts and allowing members of the public to submit comments about such petition. 2. A community board, borough president or council member may waive the requirement to receive notice of a petition for a revocable consent for a category of revocable consents, provided that such community board, borough president, or council member may revoke such waiver at any time. Upon receipt of such a waiver, the responsible agency shall not be required to submit notice of a petition for a revocable consent to such community board, borough president or council member for such category of revocable consent. d. No hearing held by the franchise and concession review committee or by the responsible agency pursuant to this section shall be held until after notice thereof and a summary of the terms and conditions of the proposed agreement shall have been published by such committee or responsible agency, as applicable, for at least [fifteen] six days, except Sundays and legal holidays, immediately prior thereto in the City Record[, nor until a notice of such hearing, indicating the place where copies of the proposed agreement may be obtained by all those interested therein, shall have been published at least twice at the expense of the proposed grantee in a print or online 
 edition of a daily newspaper designated by the mayor which is published in the city of New York and having a circulation in the borough or boroughs in which the affected property of the city is located and a print or online edition of a weekly newspaper or newspapers designated by the mayor which are published in the city of New York and have a circulation in the community district or districts in which the affected property of the city is located. In the event a franchise or revocable consent relates to property of the city located in more than one borough, notice of hearing in a weekly newspaper shall not be required; however, in that event, notice of hearing in the print or online editions of two daily newspapers, and mailing by the grantee, no later than fifteen days immediately prior to the date of the public hearing, of such notice to the borough presidents and community boards and council members in whose districts the affected property of the city is located, shall be required. In the case of a franchise for a bus route which crosses one or more borough boundaries, notice of hearing in a weekly newspaper shall not be required; however, in that event, notice of hearing in the print or online editions of two daily newspapers, and mailing by the grantee, no later than fifteen days immediately prior to the date of the public hearing, of such notice to the borough presidents and community boards and council members in whose districts the bus route is located, and posting of such notice in the buses operating upon such route, shall be required]. The grantee shall provide a notice of such hearing to the community board and council member in whose district, and the borough president in whose borough, the property subject to such revocable consent is proposed to be located. e. Inadvertent failure by the responsible agency or grantee to provide any notice required pursuant to subdivisions c and d of this section shall not serve to invalidate an approval of such petition. 
 § 3. Section 372 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new subdivision c to read as follows: c. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the mayor may delegate any powers conferred upon the mayor pursuant to this section to the head of a responsible agency. § 4. Section 375 of the New York city charter, as added by a vote of the electors on November 7, 1989, is amended to read as follows: § 375. Registration with the comptroller. All agreements memorializing the terms of franchises, revocable consents or concessions shall be agreements subject to the applicable registration requirements and other provisions of section three hundred twenty-eight except that the terms "vendor" and "contractor" as used in section three hundred twenty-eight shall be deemed to apply to the holders of franchises, revocable consents and concessions, provided that, with the consent of the comptroller, any such franchise, concession or revocable consent may commence pending such registration. § 5. Section 1152 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new paragraph 1 of subdivision q to read as follows: q. (1) The amendments to the charter amending sections 364, 371, 372 and 375, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect on March 1, 2027, provided that such amendments shall not apply to a petition for the grant of a revocable consent that has been submitted to the responsible agency at the time such amendments take effect.