Proposed Charter Amendment: Question 2 Section 1. Section 20-t of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 175 for the year 2025, is amended by adding a new subdivision h to read as follows: h. 1. Notwithstanding any provision of local law, the director shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the computerized data system described in subdivision b of section 6-116.2 of the administrative code. The director shall determine the form and format of the information maintained in such system. 2. Such director shall also be responsible for the policy decisions relating to such system, provided that such policy decisions are consistent with the rules promulgated pursuant to paragraph 3 of this subdivision. 3. Notwithstanding any provision of section 6-116.2 of the administrative code, the rulemaking body shall adopt rules specifying the time frame in which such information is required to be submitted for inclusion in such system, provided that such rules may require different information to be submitted based on the total dollar amount of a contract, the industry of a contract, or whether a contractor is a small business, or based on any other factor, as such board deems appropriate for the purposes of promoting efficient and transparent administration of city business. 4. For the purposes of paragraph 3 of this subdivision, the term “rulemaking body” means: (A) with respect to contracts subject to chapter 13 of this charter, the procurement policy board; (B) with respect to any franchise or concession subject to chapter 14 of this charter, the franchise and concession review committee. 
 § 2. Subdivision d of section 20-t of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 175 for the year 2025, is amended to read as follows: d. Delegation and designation. 1. The director may delegate to the agency chief contracting officer of each agency the duties listed in this paragraph, provided that the mayor must authorize such delegation in the case of powers conferred upon the mayor by law: (a) Certification pursuant to section 327 that the procedural requisites for the solicitation and award of contracts have been met upon adequate assurance that the agency possesses the capacity to comply with procedural requirements; and (b) Any other approvals or functions required by law, rule, or regulation, except that the approval of the mayor required under subdivision b of section 317 [shall not] may be delegated to an agency chief contracting officer only with the consent of the head of such agency. 2. The director shall periodically review each agency chief contracting officer's performance of the functions delegated, and if such performance is found unsatisfactory, the director shall revoke the agency chief contracting officer's authority to exercise such function and the director shall resume the exercise of such function. 3. The director may designate employees of the office to exercise any of the powers and duties set forth in this section upon the specific or general direction of the director. Any reference to the director or city chief procurement officer includes the persons who have received such designation. § 3. Section 20-t of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 9 for the year 2026, is renumbered section 20-v. § 4. Subdivision a of section 311 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 20 for the year 2004, is amended to read as follows: 
 a. There shall be a procurement policy board consisting of five members, three of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and two of whom shall be appointed by the comptroller. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing official. 1. Members shall have demonstrated sufficient business or professional experience to discharge the functions of the board. 2. At least one member appointed by the mayor and one member appointed by the comptroller shall not hold any other public office or public employment. The remaining members shall not be prohibited from holding any other public office or employment provided that no member may have substantial authority for the procurement of goods, services or construction pursuant to this chapter. 3. The mayor shall designate the chair. 4. The board shall meet on a regular basis and no less than quarterly. § 5. Subdivision a of section 325 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 24 for the year 2004, is amended to read as follows: a. Agencies that award client services contracts shall produce a [draft and final] plan and schedule detailing anticipated contracting actions for the upcoming fiscal year[, and shall hold at least one public hearing each year immediately following the release of the draft plan and schedule to receive testimony regarding the plan and schedule]. The [draft and final] plan and schedule shall include, but not be limited to: the type of services to be provided, the authorized maximum amount of funding associated with the program, the authorized number of contracts to be let for a particular program, the month and year of the next planned competitive solicitation. Failure to include a contract in the plan and schedule issued pursuant to this section shall not be grounds for invalidating the contract. The procurement policy board shall promulgate rules 
 governing the issuance of the [draft and final] plans and schedules, which shall ensure that [the draft plan and schedule is issued promptly following the submission of the executive budget and that the final] any such plan [and] or schedule is issued no later than September thirtieth each year. § 6. Section 326 of the New York city charter, as amended by chapter 483 of the laws of 2024, is amended to read as follows: § 326. Public notice and comment on contract awards. a. Prior to entering into any contract for goods, services or construction to be awarded by other than competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed bids from prequalified vendors, the value of which exceeds [one hundred thousand dollars] an amount determined by rule of the procurement policy board, the agency shall give notice in the City Record that comments on the proposed contract may be submitted online for a period of time of not less than seven days, determined by the procurement policy board by rule, provided that such period of time shall commence no earlier than the date such notice is given. In determining an amount pursuant to this section, the procurement policy board shall consider factors including, but not limited to, the need for efficiency and transparency in city procurements. A description of the scope of work and key terms of the contract shall be included in such notice which shall at minimum include: (i) the agency name, (ii) the procurement identification number (PIN), (iii) a brief description of the goods, services, or construction to be procured, and method of source selection, (iv) the name and address of the proposed vendor and location of the proposed program, project, or worksite, and (v) the dollar amount of the proposed contract. The procurement policy board may by rule exempt from this public notice and comment requirement contracts to be let which do not differ materially in terms and conditions, as defined by the board, from contracts 
 currently held by the city where the parties to such contracts are the same; provided, that under no circumstance may such exemption apply to any contract in value exceeding ten million dollars. b. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any procurement (i) let pursuant to a finding of an emergency under section three hundred fifteen, (ii) required to be made on an accelerated basis due to markets which experience significant, short-term price fluctuations, as identified by rule of the board, or (iii) where public notice pursuant to this section would disclose litigation strategy or otherwise impair the conduct of litigation by the city. § 10. Section 1152 of the New York city charter is amended by adding new paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of subdivision q to read as follows: (2) The amendments to the charter amending subdivision d of section 20-t and section 325, and renumbering section 20-t as section 20-v, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved such amendments to the charter. (3) The amendments to the charter amending section 311, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect on January 1, 2027. (4) The amendments to the charter amending section 326, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect on October 1, 2030.