Proposed Charter Amendment: Question 5 Section 1. Section 1528 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 215 for the year 2019, is amended to read as follows: § 1528. Revenue stabilization fund. 1. The city may maintain a revenue stabilization fund to serve as a year-to-year reserve account, subject to the New York state financial emergency act for the city of New York as amended from time to time or any successor statute. Such fund shall be created and operated in accordance with this section and any applicable state law. 2. The target amount of moneys held in reserve, which shall consist of the sum of funds held in a revenue stabilization fund and any other reserve fund maintained by the city that is identified in the methodology described in subdivision three of this section, shall be at least twelve percent of the revenue received by the city from taxes in the preceding fiscal year. The city shall deposit money, in accordance with the methodology described in subdivision three of this section, to such revenue stabilization fund if the amount of moneys held in reserve is below twelve percent of the revenue received by the city from taxes in the preceding fiscal year, 3. No later than May 1, 2027, the city shall publish a final methodology that describes how to determine the amount of moneys held in reserve and the required deposits into a revenue stabilization fund when the amount of moneys held in reserve is less than the target amount of such moneys described in subdivision two of this section. Such methodology shall take into account revenue growth trends, the amount of the city’s operating surplus, and any other factor deemed relevant for the purpose of ensuring sound fiscal management. In each fiscal year commencing on July 1, 2027, the city shall make a deposit, if any, as required by such final methodology. The city shall publish any updates to the final methodology no later than May 1, 2030, and continue to do so no less frequently than every four years thereafter. 
 4. The office of management and budget, in consultation with the comptroller, shall prepare and publish the methodology required pursuant to subdivision three of this section. a. Prior to publishing a final methodology, such office shall publish in the City Record a proposed methodology and notice for opportunity to comment and a public hearing at least thirty days prior to such public hearing. Such notice shall include the final date for receipt of written comments. b. Such office shall make such proposed methodology available to the speaker of the council, the director of the independent budget office, the state comptroller and the New York state financial control board at least thirty days prior to publication of such proposed methodology as described in paragraph a of this subdivision. c. After consideration of the relevant comments and consultations received pursuant to this subdivision, such office shall publish a final methodology in accordance with subdivision three. 5. Withdrawals from the revenue stabilization fund may be made by means of the procedures set forth in this charter for adoption or modification of the expense budget, as applicable, provided that no more than fifty percent of the total amount of such fund may be withdrawn in any fiscal year unless the mayor has certified that there is a compelling fiscal need, which may be based on circumstances including, but not be limited to, a national or regional recession, a reduction in total revenues from the preceding fiscal year as projected in the financial plan, a natural or other disaster, or a declared state of emergency in the city or state. § 2. Section 1152 of the New York city charter is amended by adding paragraph 9 to subdivision q to read as follows: 
 (9) The amendment to the charter amending section 1528, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved such amendments to the charter.