Proposed Charter Amendment: Question 3 Section 1. Section 2903 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new subdivision b-1 to read as follows: b-1. In implementing a project for the construction, maintenance or repair of a public road, street, highway, parkway, bridge or tunnel as described in subdivision b of this section, the commissioner shall consult with any agency as the commissioner may deem appropriate to ensure due regard for public safety. 1. Notwithstanding any provision of section 19-101.2 of the administrative code, an agency with which the department is required to consult regarding a project described in this subdivision shall not be required to confer with any person, other than the head of such agency, for purposes of such consultation. Failure of the commissioner to consult with any agency shall not affect the validity of any such project. 2. Notwithstanding any provision of section 19-101.2 of the administrative code, a project requires immediate implementation to preserve public safety for purposes of such section where the commissioner has determined that there is a risk of significant injury that may occur absent immediate implementation based on the incidence rate of crashes involving motor vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists or other persons or any other consideration relating to the need to preserve public safety. The commissioner shall make best efforts to promptly make any required notification or presentation. § 2. Section 195 of the New York city charter is REPEALED. § 3. Paragraph 4 of subdivision b of section 197-e of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 177 for the year 2025, is amended to read as follows: 
 4. Sale, lease (other than the lease of office space), exchange, or other disposition of the real property of the city, including the sale or lease of land under water pursuant to section eight hundred twenty-four, chapter fifteen, and other applicable provisions of law[,]: (a) to private owners of abutting property or an entity comprised thereof, provided such real property of the city is not inalienable property and cannot be independently developed, as determined by the mayor, because singly or in combination, its size, shape, applicable zoning, configuration, or topography render such development economically impracticable or infeasible; (b) where the lot area of such real property does not exceed 10,000 square feet and is not an individual landmark designated pursuant to subdivisions 8 or 9 of section 3020; or (c) where such real property consists solely of development rights from landmark sites, and any property interest necessary to facilitate such disposition; § 4. Subdivision a of section 218 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 177 for the year 2025, is amended to read as follows: a. The selection of sites for capital projects shall be pursuant to the uniform procedures provided pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d, except for acquisition of office space pursuant to section [one hundred ninety-five] 824.1, and except for the selection of a site for a resiliency project, a solar energy generation project, or the creation of open space subject to section one hundred ninety-seven-e. § 5. Subdivision b of section 384 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new paragraph 4-a to read as follows: 4-a. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the mayor may, without public auction or sealed bids, authorize the sale of real property of the city, except inalienable property or any interest therein, that cannot be independently developed, directly to 
 private owners of abutting property, or an entity or entities comprised thereof. The consideration for a sale of real property pursuant to this paragraph shall be the fair market value of such parcel as determined by appraisal. For purposes of this paragraph, real property that cannot be independently developed shall mean property that cannot be developed due to its size, shape, applicable zoning, configuration or topography, which factors, singly or in combination, render the development of such property economically impracticable or infeasible. No such sale directly to private property owners shall take place without a public auction or sealed bids (i) unless a finding by the mayor, based on a certification by the commissioner of citywide administrative services that independent development is economically impracticable or infeasible, has been made that such sale is in the best interests of the city, and (ii) until a public hearing has been held with respect to such sale after the publication of notice in the City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing, and (iii) at least thirty days in advance of such hearing, a copy of the aforesaid notice in the City Record has been mailed to each abutting property owner accompanied by a statement that the real property to be sold without auction abuts such property owner's property. Any conveyance may provide for the restriction of the use of such real property. Nothing in this paragraph exempts dispositions of real property to abutting owners (or an entity or entities comprised thereof) from any applicable review and approval requirements set forth in sections 197-c, 197-d or 197-e of this charter. § 6. Subdivision a of section 824 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 59 for the year 1996, is amended to read as follows: (a) to purchase, lease, condemn or otherwise acquire real property for the city, subject to the approval of the mayor, and to sell, lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of real property of the city, subject to the requirements of section [three hundred eighty-four] 384 and subject to review 
 and approval either pursuant to section [one hundred ninety-five] 824.1, if applicable, or pursuant to sections [one hundred ninety-seven-c] 197-c and [one hundred ninety-seven-d] 197-d. No such purchase, lease, condemnation or other acquisition, other than an acquisition pursuant to section 824.1, shall be authorized until a public hearing has been held with respect to such acquisition after the publishing of notice in the City Record at least [ten] 10 days but not more than [thirty] 30 days in advance of such hearing; provided, however, that in the case of an acquisition by purchase or condemnation, no such hearing shall be required if a public hearing is held with respect to such purchase or condemnation pursuant to any other requirement of law. In the case of a lease in which the city is to be the tenant, the notice for the hearing required in this subdivision shall include a statement of the location and proposed use of the premises, and the term and annual rent of the proposed lease. Before submitting an application pursuant to section [one hundred ninety-seven-c] 197-c for an acquisition or a disposition pursuant to this section, the commissioner shall take into consideration the criteria for location of city facilities established pursuant to section [two hundred three. If two years, not including time spent in litigation, have elapsed between (1) the final approval of a disposition or acquisition pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d and (2) execution of an agreement in connection with such disposition or acquisition, a public hearing shall be held on the proposed acquisition or disposition after the publishing of notice in the City Record at least forty-five days in advance of such hearing] 203; § 7. The New York city charter is amended by adding a new section 824.1 to read as follows: 
 § 824.1 Acquisitions of office space. Acquisitions by the city of office space or existing buildings for office use, whether by purchase, condemnation, exchange or lease, shall be subject to the following review procedure: (a) The commissioner shall make any such acquisition upon a determination by such commissioner that such acquisition is in the best interests of the city, taking into consideration an agency’s needs for office space, the cost of such office space or existing building for office use, criteria for the location of city facilities adopted pursuant to section 203, and any other factor relevant to the determination that such acquisition is in the best interests of the city. (b) Prior to making such acquisition, the commissioner shall file a notice of intent to acquire office space or an existing building for office use with the community board and councilmember of the district, and with the borough president of the borough, in which the office space or existing building proposed to be acquired. Such notice shall describe (i) the needs of such agency for office space; (ii) a description of any alternate sites considered for such acquisition, and an explanation why such alternate site was not selected; and (iii) a description of how the selected office space or existing building for office use meets criteria for the location of city facilities adopted pursuant to section 203. (c) Upon making such acquisition, the commissioner shall file with the comptroller and city council a copy of such notice, or a statement that contains the information required to be included in such notice pursuant to subdivision b of this section. § 8. Section 1152 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new subdivision q, paragraphs 5 and 6 to read as follows: 
 (5) The amendments to the charter repealing section 195, amending sections 197-e, 218, 824, and 2903, and adding section 824.1 shall take effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved such amendments to the charter. (6) The amendments to the charter adding paragraph 4-a to subdivision b of section 384 shall take effect on December 31, 2030.