Proposed Charter Amendment: Question 4 
 Section 1. Section 642 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 39 for the year 2008, is amended to read as follows: § 642. Deputies. The commissioner shall appoint two deputies, one of whom shall be the first deputy commissioner, and such other deputies as may be necessary. The commissioner may, by instrument in writing filed with the department, designate a first deputy commissioner who is [a] and any other deputy commissioners who are registered [architect] architects or [a] licensed professional [engineer] engineers to possess any of the powers granted to the commissioner by subdivision (b) or (d) of section [six hundred forty-five] 645 of this chapter. The deputy [commissioner] commissioners so designated shall possess such powers in addition to any other powers that may be assigned to him or her by the commissioner pursuant to any other provision of law. § 2. Section 643 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 69 for the year 1985, subdivision 1 as amended by a vote of the electors on November 7, 1989, subdivision 5 as amended by local law number 65 for the year 1996, and subdivision 7 as amended by local law number 64 for the year 2001, is amended to read as follows: § 643. Department; functions. The department shall enforce, with respect to buildings and structures, such provisions of the building code, zoning resolution, multiple dwelling law, labor law and other laws, rules and regulations as may govern the construction, alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions, mechanical equipment and inspection of buildings or structures in the city, and shall perform the functions of the city of New York relating to: 
 (1) the designation of buildings and structures as unsafe and the necessary legal action in relation thereto prior to the removal of the unsafe condition through demolition or sealing except as provided in section eighteen hundred two of this charter; (2) the shoring of hazardous and unsafe buildings and structures; (3) the testing and approval of power-operated cranes and derricks used for construction, alteration, demolition, excavation and maintenance purposes, including such uses in highways or sewers, or used to hoist or lower any article on the outside of any building, excluding cranes and derricks used in industrial plants or yards; (4) the location, construction, alteration and removal of signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, attached to the exterior of any building or structure; (5) (i) all surface and subsurface construction within the curb line, including curb cuts and driveways, the covering thereof and entrances thereto, and the issuance of permits in reference thereto, (ii) in conjunction with the issuance of permits for surface and subsurface construction within the curbline, such surface and subsurface construction outside the curbline as shall be expressly delegated to the department in the administrative code and the issuance of permits in relation thereto and, (iii) notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of section fourteen hundred three of this charter, in conjunction with the issuance of a permit for the construction of a building, the commissioner may approve the installation of and issue a permit for the construction of an individual on site private sewage disposal system for the premises. Such permit shall be issued in accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by the commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner of environmental protection, for the installation of individual on site private sewage disposal systems; 
 (6) the regulation, inspection and testing of gas and electricity used for light, heat and power purposes, electric, gas and steam meters, electric wires and all lights furnished to the city; [and] (7) the regulation, inspection and testing of electric wires and wiring apparatus and other appliances used or to be used for the transmission of electricity for electric light, heat, power, signaling, communication, alarm and data transmission in or on any building or structure in the city; [provided, however, that] and (8) the regulation of all construction and demolitions on wharf and waterfront property, including but not limited to wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, and structures wholly or partly thereon and other structures used in conjunction with or in furtherance of waterfront commerce or navigation and the issuance of permits with regard thereto. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, the jurisdiction of the department, except for the testing and approval of power-operated cranes and derricks used for construction, alteration, demolition, excavation and maintenance purposes and the licensing of the operators of such equipment, the regulation, inspection and testing of gas and electricity used for light, heat and power purposes, electric, gas and steam meters, electric wires and lights and the regulation, inspection and testing of wiring and appliances for electric light, heat and power, shall not extend to [waterfront property owned by the city and under the jurisdiction of the department of ports, international trade and commerce, or to the following structures on any such waterfront property; wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or partly thereon, or to such other structures used in conjunction with or in furtherance of waterfront commerce or navigation, or to] bridges, tunnels or subways or structures appurtenant thereto. 
 § 3. Chapter 26 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new section 643.1 to read as follows: § 643.1. Licenses, permits, and certificates of occupancy continued. Any license, permit or certificate of completion relating to the powers and duties transferred to the department of buildings by the local law that added subdivision 8 of section 643 in force upon the effective date of such local law and issued by the department of small business services or any predecessor agency shall continue in force on and after such effective date and shall have the same force and effect as a license, permit or certificate of occupancy issued by the department of buildings, and all provisions of law which apply to licenses, permits and certificates of occupancy issued by the department of buildings shall apply with like effect to licenses, permits and certificates of completion issued by the department of small business services or any predecessor agency, including those provisions which empower the commissioner of buildings to revoke a license, permit or certificate of occupancy. § 4. The opening paragraph of subdivision a of section 645 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 219 for the year 2017, is amended to read as follows: (a) There shall be a main office of the department and in each borough at least one branch office [and a borough superintendent]. There shall be one borough commissioner for each of the five borough branch offices, provided that the commissioner may appoint one or more additional borough commissioners who may exercise such powers as are delegated by the commissioner throughout the city. Persons appointed as inspectors to perform functions of the department shall have such qualifications as shall be prescribed by the commissioner of citywide administrative services after consultation with the commissioner; provided however that, for inspections related to work on medical and natural gas piping systems, backflow prevention, 
 electrical work and other work as the department may include through rule, such qualifications shall include: § 5. Subdivision c of section 645 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 29 for the year 1977, is amended to read as follows: (c) The commissioner may, by instrument in writing filed in the department, designate [a] borough [superintendent] commissioners of the department to possess within a borough or citywide, as applicable, any of the powers granted to the commissioner by subdivision (b) of this section and to exercise the same within such borough or citywide, as applicable, in the name of the commissioner for such times and under such conditions as [he] such commissioner may specify. The borough [superintendent] commissioners shall also perform such other duties as the commissioner may direct. § 6. Section 645 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new subdivision e to read as follows: (e) City agencies that issue permits and approvals with respect to new construction, including but not limited to the department of buildings, the department of environmental protection, the fire department and the department of transportation, shall cooperate with the commissioner of buildings in the development of a system, subject to appropriations, that will accommodate the submission of applications for and the issuance of permits and approvals for construction projects by all such agencies. Such agencies shall accept such applications through such system. The system shall be established by December 1, 2029 or within such further period of time as the commissioner determines may be feasible. § 7. Section 648 of the New York city charter, as amended by local law number 39 for the year 2008, is amended to read as follows: 
 § 648. Appeals. Appeals may be taken from decisions of the commissioner and of a deputy commissioner or [the] a borough [superintendent] commissioner acting under a written delegation of power filed in accordance with the provisions of section six hundred forty-two or subdivision (c) of section six hundred forty-five of this chapter, to the board of standards and appeals as provided by law. § 8. Section 649 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 29 for the year 1977, is amended to read as follows: § 649. Inspection. The commissioner, any deputy commissioner, borough [superintendents] commissioner, inspectors, or any officer of the department authorized in writing by the commissioner or a borough [superintendent to act in his borough] commissioner may, in accordance with law, for the purpose of performing their respective official duties, enter and inspect any building, structure, enclosure, premises or any part thereof or anything therein or attached thereto; and any refusal to permit such entry or inspection shall be a misdemeanor triable in criminal court and punishable upon conviction by not more than thirty days imprisonment or by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both. § 9. Subdivision 6 of section 666 of the New York city charter, as renumbered by local law number 49 for the year 1991, paragraph a as amended by local law number 39 for the year 2008, is amended to read as follows: 6. To hear and decide appeals from and review, (a) except as otherwise provided by law, any order, requirement, decision or determination of the commissioner of buildings or of a deputy commissioner of buildings or any borough [superintendent] commissioner of buildings acting under a written delegation of power 
 from the commissioner of buildings filed in accordance with the provisions of section six hundred forty-two or section six hundred forty-five of this charter, or (b) any order, requirement, decision or determination of the fire commissioner or any rule or regulation or amendment or repeal thereof made by the fire commissioner, [or (c) any order, requirement, decision or determination of the commissioner of transportation or the commissioner of ports and trade made in relation to the structures or uses on water front property under his or her jurisdiction in connection with the application or enforcement of the provisions of the zoning resolution of the city of New York, the labor law and such other laws, rules and regulations as may govern the construction, alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions, mechanical equipment and inspection of structures in the city,] under the authority conferred upon them by law, by reversing or affirming in whole or in part, or modifying the order, regulation, decision or determination appealed from, and to make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have the power of the officer from whose ruling the appeal is taken, and of any officer under whose written delegation of power such ruling was made. § 10. Subdivision 2 of section 1301 of the New York city charter, as added by local law number 61 for the year 1991, paragraph b as amended by local law number 59 for the year 1996, paragraphs l, m and o as amended by local law number 148 for the year 2013, paragraph n as amended by local law number 26 for the year 2008, is amended to read as follows: 2. The commissioner shall have the power and duty to exercise the functions of the city relating to the development, redevelopment, construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance, management, administration and regulation of public markets, wharf property, water 
 front property and airports within the city of New York including, without limitation, the following: a. to have exclusive charge and control of the public markets of the city, to fix fees for services, licenses and privileges in connection therewith, to rent space therein and to enter into leases therefor, and to regulate all facilities in use as public markets for the public health, safety and welfare; b. to have [exclusive] charge and control of the wharf property and water front owned by the city and of the building, rebuilding, repairing, altering, maintaining, strengthening, protecting, cleaning, dredging, and deepening of such wharf property and water front property; provided, that the commissioner may, subject to the approval of the mayor, designate parcels of wharf property and water front property to be managed pursuant to this paragraph and leased or permitted pursuant to paragraphs g and h of this subdivision by the commissioner of citywide administrative services. Any such designation shall be made in writing and may be withdrawn by the commissioner subject to the approval of the mayor; c. [to have the exclusive power to enforce with respect to public markets, water front property and any structures on water front property under its jurisdiction, the labor law and such other laws, rules and regulations as may govern the dredging, filling, removal, construction, alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions, mechanical equipment and inspection of structures in the city, and the issuance of permits and certificates of completion in reference thereto, and to establish and amend fees to be charged for the issuance of such permits or certificates of completion, which fees shall be established by the rules of the commissioner] Reserved; 
 d. to have [exclusive] power to regulate the dredging and filling of water front property [and the following structures on any water front property: wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or partly therein, and such other structures used in conjunction with and in furtherance of water front commerce and/or navigation] and wharf property and the removal of structural and non-structural nuisances therefrom; e. to have exclusive power to regulate the use of marginal streets so that they may be used to the best advantage in connection with wharf property and to regulate by license or otherwise the transfer of goods and merchandise upon, over or under all such marginal streets; f. to lease, subject to the approval of the council, any wharf property belonging to the city primarily for purposes of water front commerce or in furtherance of navigation. Such leases may be sold at public auction duly advertised in the City Record for at least ten days prior thereto, and if not so sold the terms of any lease must be approved by the council by a three-fourths vote after a public hearing, notice of which shall be published in the City Record for the six days of publication of the City Record immediately prior thereto. All such leases shall be for such terms and shall contain such conditions as may be provided by law. The council shall act within forty-five days of the filing of the proposed terms and conditions of any such lease with the council. Failure of the council to act on a lease within such forty-five day period shall be deemed an approval of such lease. All votes of the council pursuant to this subdivision shall be filed by the council with the mayor and shall be final unless disapproved by the mayor within five days of such filing except that there shall be no right of mayoral disapproval if a three-fourths vote of the council is required pursuant to this subdivision. Any such mayoral disapproval shall be filed by the mayor with the council and shall be subject to override by a two-thirds vote of the council within ten days of such filing; 
 g. to lease, pursuant to review and approval pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d, any wharf property belonging to the city for purposes other than water front commerce or in furtherance of navigation, including, without limitation, commercial, industrial, residential or recreational purposes. All such leases shall be for such terms and shall contain such conditions as may be provided by law. No such lease may be authorized by the commissioner until a public hearing has been held with respect thereto after the publication of notice in the City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing; h. to grant temporary permits terminable at will for a period not exceeding three years for the purposes of water front commerce or in furtherance of navigation and not exceeding one year for other purposes to use and occupy any wharf property belonging to the city; i. to set aside by order any wharf property belonging to the city, which has not been leased, for general wharfage purposes or for the use of any special kind of commerce, or of any class of vessel, or of any agency, and to revoke or modify such order as to any such wharf property at any time; j. to regulate the charges for wharfage, cranage and dockage of all vessels or floating structures using any wharf property set aside under paragraph i of this subdivision, provided that the rates which it shall be lawful to charge for wharfage, cranage and dockage from any vessel or floating structure which makes use of any other wharf property within the port of New York shall be fixed by rules of the commissioner; k. to sell buildings, structures and other improvements on market property and wharf property to a person leasing such property pursuant to paragraphs a, f and g of this subdivision; provided, however, that any such sale of improvements shall be subject to the procedure for review and approval applicable to the lease related to the improvements; 
 l. to manage and promote the economic development of all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops owned by the city, and to lease such property, subject to review and approval pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d. No such lease may be authorized by the commissioner until a public hearing has been held with respect thereto after the publication of notice in the City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing; m. except as provided in section 487, to have charge and control of the regulation for the health and safety of the general public of all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports, helistops, marginal streets and parking facilities appurtenant thereto owned by the city; n. except as provided in section 487, to establish, amend and enforce rules for the proper care and use of all public markets, wharf property, water front property and all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops owned by the city and placed in his or her charge or over which he or she shall have power of regulation, and to issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. The violation of or the failure to comply with any such order or rule shall be triable in criminal court and punishable, upon conviction, by not more than thirty days imprisonment or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five thousand dollars, or both; o. except as provided in section 487, to have the exclusive power to regulate all privately owned airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports and helistops and the operation out of and into such bases as well as the control of ground effect craft and aircraft operations to or from other sites within the city not so designated as airports, heliports, helistops, airplane landing sites or seaplane bases; and 
 p. to promote and encourage the expansion and development of the city as a center for intrastate, interstate and international overland freight transportation[; and q. to administer and enforce the provisions of the zoning resolution of the city of New York in respect to the following structures on any water front property: wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or partly thereon, and such other structures used in conjunction with and in furtherance of water front commerce and/or navigation in the same manner and in accordance with the same procedure as is prescribed therein]. § 11. Section 1152 of the New York city charter is amended by adding a new subdivision q, paragraphs 7 and 8 to read as follows: (7) The amendments to the charter amending sections 643 and 1301, and adding section 643.1, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect on December 31, 2030 or upon the effective date of a code that applies to the construction, alteration and demolition of waterfront structures, whichever is sooner. (8) The amendments to the charter amending sections 642, 645, 648, 649 and 666, as approved by the electors on November 3, 2026, shall take effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved such amendments to the charter.